whether you like it or not we use
numbers every day some numbers such as
the speed of sound are small and easy to
work with other numbers such as the
speed of light are much larger and
cumbersome to work with we can use
scientific notation to express these
large numbers in a much more manageable
format so we can write 299,792,458
meters per second as 3.0 times 10 to the
8th meters per second correct scientific
notation requires that the first term
range in value said it is greater than 1
but less than 10 and the second term
represents the power of 10 or order of
magnitude by which we multiply the first
term we can use the power of 10 as a
tool and making quick estimations when
we do not need or care for the exact
value of a number for example diameter
of an atom is approximately 10 to the
power of negative 12 meters the height
of the tree is approximately 10 to the
power of 1 meters the diameter of the
earth is approximately 10 to the power
of 7 meters the ability to use the power
of 10 is an estimation tool can come in
handy every now and again like when
you're trying to guess the number of
M&Ms in a jar but is also an essential
skill in math and science especially
when dealing with what are known as
Fermi problems Fermi problems are named
after the physicist Enrico Fermi who's
famous for making rapid order of
magnitude estimations or rapid
estimations with seemingly little
available data Fermi worked on the
Manhattan Project in developing the
atomic bomb and when it was tested at
the Trinity site in 1945 Fermi dropped a
few pieces of paper during a blast and
used the distance they traveled
backwards as they fell to estimate
right for the explosion as ten kilo tons
of TNT which is on the same order of
magnitude as the actual value of 20
kilotons one example of the classic
Fermi estimation problems is to
determine how many piano tuners there
are in the city of Chicago Illinois at
first there seem to be so many unknowns
that the problem appears to be
unsolvable that is the perfect
application for a power of 10 estimation
as we don't need an exact answer an
estimation will work we can start by
determining how many people live in the
city of Chicago we know that it is a
large city we may be unsure about
exactly how many people live in the city
are there 1 million people 5 million
people this is the point in the problem
where many people become frustrated with
the uncertainty we can easily get
through this by using the power of 10 we
can estimate the magnitude of the
population of Chicago as 10 to the power
of 6 well this doesn't tell us exactly
how many people live there it serves as
an accurate estimation for the actual
population of just under 3 million
people so if there are approximately 10
to the 6 people in Chicago and running
pianos are there if we want to continue
dealing with orders of magnitude we can
either say that one out of 10 or one out
of 100 people on a piano
even that our estimate of the population
includes children adults will go with
the latter estimate which estimates that
there are approximately 10 to the fourth
or 10,000 pianos in Chicago with this
many pianos how many piano tuners are
there we could begin the process of
thinking about how often the pianos are
tuned
how many pianos are tuned in one day or
how many days a piano tuner works but
that's not the point of rapid estimation
we instead think in orders of magnitude
and say that a piano tuner Tunes roughly
10 to the 2nd pianos in the given year
which is approximately a few hundred
pianos given our previous estimate of 10
to the 4th pianos in Chicago and the
estimate that each piano tuner can tune
10 to the 2nd pianos each year we can
say that there are approximately 10 to
the 2nd piano tuners in Chicago now I
know what you must be thinking how can
all of these estimates produce a
reasonable answer well it's rather
simple in any fermi problem it is
assumed that the over estimates and
under estimates balance each other out
and produce an estimation that is
usually within one order of magnitude of
the actual answer in our case we can
confirm this by looking in the phone
book for the number of piano tuners
listed in Chicago what do we find
eighty-one pretty incredible given our
order magnitude estimation but hey
that's the power of ten
you